Caroll/data apis part 2 (#131)
vendia/blog: posts/2022-06-09-apis-for-real-time-data-sharing.md

---
title: 'How to Make Your APIs "Data-aware"'
description: 'Data APIs continue to be a challenge for teams. What if your APIs did the heavy lifting and kept a single source of truth.'
date: '2022-06-09'
authors:
  - Tim Wagner
---

# An Alternative Architecture for Smart, “Data-aware” APIs
_Note, this is part 2 in our Data APIs series. [Read part 1](https://www.vendia.net/blog/apis-for-data) 

In our previous post we talked through why APIs are still so difficult for teams to implement and maintain and why legacy options fail to meet current business needs. In this blog we will walk through modern APIs that help provide a single source of truth while also providing a ledgered lookback. 

> An ideal data-sharing API would share the best of each of these approaches (see Figure 6):

Author: Because I did some lazy copy and pasting without thinking about it.

> An ideal data-sharing API would share the best of each of these approaches (see Figure 6):

Reviewer: 😂

> An ideal data-sharing API would share the best of each of these approaches (see Figure 6):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An ideal data-sharing API would share the best of each of these approaches (see Figure 1):
```

Let’s see how that works using a simple example.

## A CRM Example

Let’s take a simple but pervasive example of data sharing: Customer profiles. Customer information may be mastered in a CRM, but it gets produced and consumed in many places, including with a business’s partners and alliances. It’s also a typical example where inconsistent data served up by an API could be dangerous: With compliance regulations such as GDPR in Europe and CCPA in California, getting a customer’s PII sharing settings wrong (through outdated or inconsistent API values) could literally mean breaking the law.

To keep things simple, we’ll use a basic data model that includes a customer’s PII (name, contact information). Each partner sharing data about a customer can indicate which products the customer is consuming, in order to build a composite picture of the customer’s journey and engagement over time. (In a more complete example, this would likely include additional, time ordered event data.) A sample data model (schema) is shown below in conceptual form:

> ![Figure 8](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/98492452/172912756-a43fcb9b-839d-4c59-81dc-74b858b7a186.png)

Reviewer: Figure 8, or Figure 3?

Author: oh snap - good catch. 😜

> Despite the simplicity of this example, note that the sharing and lineage tracking rules  for this data are already non-trivial:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite the simplicity of this example, note that the sharing and lineage tracking rules for this data are already non-trivial:
```

* Either company can update the customer’s basic information (name, address)
* Only Acme can update the list of Acme products the customer uses (but CoolTech can view this information)
* Only CoolTech can update the list of CoolTech products the customer uses (but Acme can view this information)
* All previous versions of the data need to be retained, and all changes to the data need to be tracked, so that audits can be performed to ensure GDPR, CCPA, and other regulatory program compliance by a third party

> The process of using Vendia is simple: given the data model above, the system automatically generates cloud hosted APIs, streaming event solutions, and data storage subsystems for both Acme and CoolTech in just a few minutes. These systems “production grade” immediately – they come with prebuilt scaling, fault tolerance, and both on-the-fly and at-rest encryption built in … no additional coding is required to achieve any of these outcomes. Each company can now set up custom authentication and authorization for as many systems as they like, even using additional nodes if they want their data to span multiple public clouds.

Reviewer: `These systems "production grade" immediately` is unclear to me.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The process of using Vendia is simple: given the data model above, the system automatically generates cloud hosted APIs, streaming event solutions, and data storage subsystems for both Acme and CoolTech in just a few minutes. These systems are production grade immediately – they come with prebuilt scaling, fault tolerance, and both on-the-fly and at-rest encryption built in without additional coding required. Each company can now set up custom authentication and authorization for as many systems as they like, even using additional nodes if they want their data to span multiple public clouds.
```

## Changes Over Time

If the schema evolves, for example to include additional data about the customer’s level of spend, the system automatically adjusts the implementation in a seamless fashion, preserving the existing application integrations and data. (This is one of the great advantages of combining GraphQL APIs with a compiler-driven solution that actually models the data, versus a “dumb pipe” that has no idea if or when the content it carries will break existing clients.)

> If the business relationships themselves evolve, for example to include a new partner, CompanyThree, Vendia can automatically deploy and synchronize additional nodes for new parties without incurring downtime or disruption to the existing system, allowing the ecosystem to seamlessly evolve to meet business needs. Additional nodes can also be added to create multi-region backups, multi-cloud application strategies, or additional operational boundaries. Advanced Vendia features, including smart contracts and tokenization, can be employed as regulatory and assurance program requirements evolve, enabling all parties to manage their data (both shared and private) with control, even in highly regulated and secured environments.

Reviewer: Tokenization seems forward thinking - want to include it already?

Author: Wagner wrote it... so I'm not gonna veto him. 😄

## Vendor Selection Guidance

> With the large number of mechanisms available, how do you decide which alternative to use when? While the specifics of a given scenario are always relevant, the list below groups common solutions by category.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the large number of mechanisms available, how do you decide which alternative to use and when to use it? While the specifics of a given scenario are always relevant, the list below groups common solutions by category.
```
